John McCarthy was an American computer scientist and cognitive scientist. John McCarthy was one of the founders of the discipline of artificial intelligence. John McCarthy co-authored the document that coined the term AI, developed the programming language family Lisp, significantly influenced the design of the language ALGOL, popularized time-sharing, and invented garbage collection. John McCarthy spent most of his career at Stanford University. John McCarthy received many accolades and honors,  Turing Award, the United States National Medal of Science, and the Kyoto Prize.
John McCarthy was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on September 4, 1927, to an Irish immigrant father, John Patrick McCarthy, and a Lithuanian Jewish immigrant mother, Ida McCarthy. John McCarthy's father came from Cromane, a small fishing village in County Kerry, Ireland. John McCarthy's mother died in 1957.
Both John McCarthy's parents were active members of the Communist Party during the 1930s, and John McCarthy's parents encouraged learning and critical thinking. Before John McCarthy attended high school, John McCarthy got interested in science by reading a translation of a Russian popular science book for children, called 100,000 Whys. John McCarthy was fluent in the Russian language and made friends with Russian scientists during multiple trips to the Soviet Union, but John McCarthy became disillusioned after making visits to the Soviet Bloc, which led to John McCarthy becoming a conservative Republican.
John McCarthy graduated from Belmont High School two years early. John McCarthy was accepted into Caltech in 1944.
John McCarthy showed an early aptitude for mathematics; during John McCarthy's teens, John McCarthy taught himself college mathematics by studying the textbooks used at the nearby Caltech. As a result, John McCarthy was able to skip the first two years of mathematics at Caltech. John McCarthy was suspended from Caltech for failure to attend physical education courses. John McCarthy then served in the US Army and was readmitted, receiving a BS in mathematics in 1948.
John McCarthy initially completed graduate studies at Caltech before moving to Princeton University. John McCarthy received a PhD in mathematics from Princeton in 1951 after completing a doctoral dissertation, titled "Projection operators and partial differential equations," under the supervision of Donald C. Spencer.
John McCarthy is one of the "founding fathers" of artificial intelligence, together with Alan Turing, Marvin Minsky, Allen Newell, and Herbert A. Simon. John McCarthy, Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester, and Claude E. Shannon coined the term "artificial intelligence" in a proposal that they wrote for the famous Dartmouth conference in Summer 1956. This conference started AI as a field.
In 1958, John McCarthy proposed the advice taker.
In the late 1950s, John McCarthy discovered that primitive recursive functions could be extended to compute with symbolic expressions, producing the Lisp programming language. Lisp soon became the programming language of choice for AI applications after its publication in 1960.
In 1958, John McCarthy served on an Association for Computing Machinery ad hoc committee on Languages that became part of the committee that designed ALGOL 60. In August 1959, John McCarthy proposed the use of recursion and conditional expressions, which became part of ALGOL. 
Around 1959, John McCarthy invented so-called "garbage collection" methods, a kind of automatic memory management, to solve problems in Lisp.
John McCarthy helped to motivate the creation of Project MAC at MIT when John McCarthy worked there, and at Stanford University, John McCarthy helped establish the Stanford AI Laboratory, for many years a friendly rival to Project MAC.
John McCarthy was instrumental in the creation of three of the very earliest time-sharing systems, Compatible Time-Sharing System, BBN Time-Sharing System, and Dartmouth Time Sharing System.
In 1961, John McCarthy was perhaps the first to suggest publicly the idea of utility computing, in a speech given to celebrate MIT's centennial: that computer time-sharing technology might result in a future in which computing power and even specific applications could be sold through the utility business model. This idea of a computer or information utility was very popular during the late 1960s, but had faded by the mid-1990s. 
In 1966, John McCarthy and John McCarthy’s team at Stanford wrote a computer program used to play a series of chess games with counterparts in the Soviet Union; John McCarthy's team lost two games and drew two games.
From 1978 to 1986, John McCarthy developed the circumscription method of non-monotonic reasoning.
In 1982, John McCarthy seems to have originated the idea of the space fountain, a type of tower extending into space and kept vertical by the outward force of a stream of pellets propelled from Earth along a sort of conveyor belt which returns the pellets to Earth. Payloads would ride the conveyor belt upward.
John McCarthy often commented on world affairs on the Usenet forums. John McCarthy was a serious book reader, an optimist, and a staunch supporter of free speech. John McCarthy went on to defend free speech criticism involving European ethnic jokes at Stanford.
John McCarthy saw the importance of mathematics and mathematics education. John McCarthy advised 30 PhD graduates.
John McCarthy’s 2001 short story "The Robot and the Baby" farcically explored the question of whether robots should have emotions, and anticipated aspects of Internet culture and social networking that have become increasingly prominent during ensuing decades.
John McCarthy was married three times. John McCarthy‘s second wife was Vera Watson, a programmer and mountaineer who died in 1978 attempting to scale Annapurna I Central as part of an all-women expedition. John McCarthy later married Carolyn Talcott, a computer scientist at Stanford and later SRI International.
John McCarthy declared himself an atheist in a speech about Artificial Intelligence at Stanford Memorial Church. Raised as a Communist, John McCarthy became a conservative Republican after a visit to Czechoslovakia in 1968 after the Soviet invasion. John McCarthy died at home in Stanford on October 24, 2011.